Revised version following adoption call comments (#5)
bemasc/ddr-forwarders: draft-schwartz-add-ddr-forwarders.md

# Reputation Verified Selection (RVS) {#client-policy}

Reputation Verified Selection (RVS) is a method for validating whether connection using DDR is allowed.  Clients MAY use RVS when (a) the local DNS server is identified by a Private IP address and (b) the DDR SVCB resolution process does not produce any Encrypted DNS endpoints that have this IP address in their A or AAAA records.  RVS then proceeds as follows:

1. The client connects to one of the indicated Encrypted DNS endpoints.
1. The client receives a certificate, which it verifies to a suitable root of trust.
1. For each identity (e.g. SubjectAltName) in the certificate, the client constructs a Resolver Identity:
  a. For DNS over TLS and DNS over QUIC, the Resolver Identity is an IP address or hostname and the port number used for the connection.
  b. For DNS over HTTPS, the Resolver Identity is a URI Template in absolute form, containing the port number used for the connection and path indicated by `dohpath`.
1. The client determines the reputation of each Resolver Identity derived from the certificate.
1. The maximum (i.e. most favorable) reputation is the reputation of this connection.

> > TODO: Consider using the SVCB TargetName to select a single Resolver Identity.  Does this require the use of SNI?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> OPEN QUESTION: Would it be better to use the SVCB TargetName to select a single Resolver Identity?  This would avoid the need to enumerate the certificate's names, but it would require the use of SNI (unlike standard DDR), and would not be compatible with all upstream encrypted resolvers.

> OPEN QUESTION: Can we simplify the resolver identity to just a domain name?  This would make reputation systems easier, but it would not allow distinct reputation for different colocated resolution services, so reputation providers would have to be sure that no approved resolver has other interesting colocated services.
```

Clients SHOULD start by checking the resolver endpoint with the numerically lowest SVCB SvcPriority.  Clients MAY wait until a DNS query triggers an Encrypted DNS connection attempt before performing this verification.

If RVS encounters an error or rejects the server, the client MUST fall back to plaintext DNS on port 53.

Successful validation then permits cross-forwarder upgrade.

## Reputation systems {#reputation-systems}

Embedding a list of known trusted resolvers in a client is only one possible model for assessing the reputation of a resolver. In future a range of online reputation services might be available to be queried, each returning an answer according to their own specific criteria. These might involve answers on other properties such as jurisdiction, or certification by a particular body. It is out of scope for this document to define these query methods, other than to note that designers should be aware of bootstrapping problems. It is the client's decision as to how to combine these answers, possibly using additional metadata (e.g. location), to make a determination of reputation.

### Granularity of reputation system

> This document is written using the assumption that ADN is the finest grained key for which it is useful to have a reputation value. With DoH it is possible to have multiple independent services at different URI paths, and with DoT and DoQ it is possible to separate by port. {{NEXTDNS}} is an example of DoH URI separation, with one path per customer, dynamically provisioned. It is an open question whether it is useful to be able to query, and provide, multiple reputations per ADN. If that is answered with yes, references to ADN in this document will need to be updated appropriately. If answered no, ADN reputations must be defined based on the worst-case service offered at that name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

  MICROSOFT-DOH:
    target: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-server/networking/dns/doh-client-support#determine-which-doh-servers-are-on-the-known-server-list
    title: Determine which DoH servers are on the known server list
  NEXTDNS:
    target: https://nextdns.io/
    title: NextDNS

--- abstract

> This draft describes a modification to the Discovery of Designated Resolvers (DDR) standard, enabling use of encrypted DNS in the presence of legacy DNS forwarders.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This draft describes an extension to the Discovery of Designated Resolvers (DDR) standard, enabling use of encrypted DNS in the presence of legacy DNS forwarders.
```

Also, I think this text means that the document should be standards-track, not informative.

--- middle

# Introduction

The Discovery of Designated Resolvers specification {{?DDR=I-D.draft-ietf-add-ddr}} describes a mechanism for clients to learn about the encrypted protocols supported by a DNS server.  It also describes a client validation policy that has strong security properties.

> Recent estimates suggest that a large fraction, perhaps a majority, of residential internet users in the United States and Europe rely on local DNS forwarders that are not compatible with DDR. This is because they are accessed via a private IP address, which TLS certificates cannot prove ownership of. Many such devices also face significant hurdles in being upgraded to support encrypted DNS. So it is likely that a large installed base of legacy DNS forwarders, providing Do53 on a private IP address, will remain for some years.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Recent estimates suggest that a large fraction, perhaps a majority, of residential internet users in the United States and Europe rely on local DNS forwarders that are not compatible with DDR. This is because they are accessed via a private IP address, which TLS certificates cannot normally prove ownership of. Many such devices also face significant hurdles in being upgraded to support encrypted DNS, so it is likely that a large installed base of legacy DNS forwarders, providing Do53 on a private IP address, will remain for some years.
```

> A client in such a network that wants to use the network's DNS resolver is forced to use Do53. It is therefore vulnerable to attacks both on the local network, and between this network and the upstream provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A client in such a network that wants to use the network's DNS resolver is forced to use Do53. It is therefore vulnerable to passive surveillance both on the local network, and between this network and the upstream provider, even if the upstream DNS resolver supports encrypted DNS.
```

## Scope

This document describes the interaction between DDR and legacy DNS forwarders.

DNS forwarders and resolvers that are implemented with awareness of DDR are out of scope, as they are not affected by this discussion (although see Security Considerations, {{security-considerations}}).

IPv6-only networks whose default DNS server has a Global Unicast Address are out of scope, even if this server is actually a simple forwarder.  If the DNS server does not use a private IP address, it is not a "legacy DNS forwarder" under this draft's definition.

# Conventions and Definitions

Private IP Address - Any IP address reserved for loopback {{?RFC1122}}, link-local {{?RFC3927}}, private {{?RFC1918}}, local {{?RFC4193}}, or Carrier-Grade NAT {{?RFC6598}} use.

Legacy DNS Forwarder - An apparent DNS resolver, known to the client only by a private IP address, that forwards the client's queries to an upstream resolver, and has not been updated with any knowledge of DDR.

Cross-Forwarder Upgrade - Establishment and use of a direct, encrypted connection between the client and the upstream resolver.

# Reputation Verified Selection (RVS) {#client-policy}

> On receipt of an answer to the _dns.resolver.arpa query, the client scans the available access methods and for each one extracts the offered Authentication Domain Name (ADN). Each ADN is then checked to see if it has sufficient reputation, according to a reputation scheme (e.g. a locally stored list of respectable resolvers). The particular choice of scheme is not prescribed (see {{reputation-systems}}) and is a decision for the client.

Reviewer: Alas, there is no such thing as an ADN in DDR.  There isn't even an SNI.  Here's how I think this has to work:

```suggestion
Reputation Verified Selection (RVS) is a method for validating whether connection using DDR is allowed.  Clients MAY use RVS when (a) the local DNS server is identified by a Private IP address and (b) the DDR SVCB resolution process does not produce any Encrypted DNS endpoints that have this IP address in their A or AAAA records.  RVS then proceeds as follows:

1. The client connects to one of the indicated Encrypted DNS endpoints.
1. The client receives a certificate, which it verifies to a suitable root of trust.
1. For each identity (e.g. SubjectAltName) in the certificate, the client constructs a Resolver Identity:
  a. For DNS over TLS and DNS over QUIC, the Resolver Identity is an IP address or hostname and the port number used for the connection.
  b. For DNS over HTTPS, the Resolver Identity is a URI Template in absolute form, containing the port number used for the connection and path indicated by `dohpath`.
1. The client determines the reputation of each Resolver Identity derived from the certificate.
1. The maximum (i.e. most favorable) reputation is the reputation of this connection.

> TODO: Consider using the SVCB TargetName to select a single Resolver Identity.  Does this require the use of SNI?

This process MUST be repeated whenever a new TLS session is established, but reputation scores for each resolver endpoint MAY be cached.

For DNS over HTTPS, the `:authority` pseudo-header MUST reflect the Resolver Identity with the most favorable reputation, to ensure that the HTTP requests are well-formed and are directed to the intended service.  If the Resolver Identity is a wildcard, the reputation system MUST replace it with a valid hostname that matches the wildcard.
```

Author: I'll have to think about this tomorrow.

Author: Ben, I don't see why this is necessary!

Firstly there is an ADN in DDR. Section 7 of svcb-dns says "A resolver known as resolver.example that supports: DoT on resolver.example ports 853 (implicit in record 1) and 8530 (explicit in record 2), with "resolver.example" as the Authentication Domain Name"  This ADN comes from the TargetName of the SVCB record. (We probably ought to clarify that ADN appears as the TargetName.)

Second, from the client's perspective it will be trying to reach, and authenticate, a single ADN. Just because the server's TLS certificate supports "search.example" and "tunnelling.example" in addition to "resolver.example", that doesn't mean the client needs to pay any attention to that. The client should only care about resolver.example, and whether that name is reputable or not. If the name is not reputable, it should not connect, end of story.

If you think I'm wrong, please explain why?

Reviewer: > Ben, I don't see why this is necessary!

> Firstly there is an ADN in DDR. Section 7 of svcb-dns says "A resolver known as resolver.example that supports: DoT on resolver.example ports 853 (implicit in record 1) and 8530 (explicit in record 2), with "resolver.example" as the Authentication Domain Name"

Yes, but "ADN" does not appear (normatively) anywhere in DDR.

>This ADN comes from the TargetName of the SVCB record. (We probably ought to clarify that ADN appears as the TargetName.)

No, the ADN corresponds to the Owner Name.  The TargetName is not security relevant.  In DDR (as used here), there is no meaningful Owner Name.

>Second, from the client's perspective it will be trying to reach, and authenticate, a single ADN.

No, its only identity anchor for the resolver is its IP address, but this is a private IP.

> Just because the server's TLS certificate supports "search.example" and "tunnelling.example" in addition to "resolver.example", that doesn't mean the client needs to pay any attention to that. The client should only care about resolver.example, and whether that name is reputable or not. If the name is not reputable, it should not connect, end of story.

See this quote from DDR: "When performing discovery using resolver IP addresses, clients MUST use the IP address as the URI host for DoH requests.".  This is because there is no known name at connection time.  The security of HTTPS requires the URI host and the certificate name to match.  If the server is identified by a domain name, this also requires SNI.

In this draft, we could reinterpret TargetName in the way you suggest.  I'm not necessarily opposed to that, but it would be a novel mechanism that we would have to document here.  There are some tradeoffs to consider, as either way this process deviates somewhat from "standard" DDR.

In "TargetName-based" RVS:

* Server operators have to make sure that the TargetName appears in the certificate.  This is not normally required by DDR, so some upstream servers may not be compatible with RVS.
* DDR likely has to place the TargetName in the SNI (normally omitted).  This makes RVS connections look different from normal DDR on the wire.

In "Certificate-based" RVS:

* The client has to extract the TLS certificate from its library.
* The client has to run multiple reputation checks.
* For DoH, the client has to perform connection setup before it knows what DoH URI host it will use.

I'm not sure which is worse.

EDIT: I've added a TODO to my suggested text here, to consider using TargetName in some fashion.  I don't think we need to pin that down in this revision.

> Assessing reputation limits the ability of a DDR forgery attack to cause harm, as it will only allow an attacker to direct clients to a resolver they consider trustworthy. Major DoH client implementations already include lists of known resolvers {{CHROME-DOH}}{{MICROSOFT-DOH}}{{MOZILLA-TRR}}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Assessing reputation limits the ability of a DDR forgery attack to cause harm, as it will only allow an attacker to direct clients to a resolver they consider trustworthy. Major DoH client implementations already include lists of known or trusted resolvers {{CHROME-DOH}}{{MICROSOFT-DOH}}{{MOZILLA-TRR}}.
```

> If no ADNs pass the reputation check, the client must not proceed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If no resolvers pass the reputation check, the client must not proceed.
```

> From the set that have passed, the client should choose the one with numerically lowest SVCB SvcPriority, but may choose any that pass. If the SvcPriority is zero (AliasMode) the client follows the alias to the TargetName as described in {{?SVCB=I-D.draft-ietf-dnsop-svcb-https}}, generating a new SVCB query if needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clients SHOULD start by checking the resolver endpoint with the numerically lowest SVCB SvcPriority.  Clients MAY wait until a DNS query triggers an Encrypted DNS connection attempt before performing this verification.
```

> The client now possesses a chosen ADN and a set of access methods for reaching the ADN's encrypted DNS services. Once successfully connected to one of these services, it must validate the offered TLS certificate so that it can be confident that the upstream server knows the private key for the Authentication Domain Name. It must also check that the TLS certificate of the resolver contains the ADN in a subjectAltName extension. If the validation fails either of these, the client must not proceed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If RVS encounters an error or rejects the server, the client MUST fall back to plaintext DNS on port 53.
```

Successful validation then permits cross-forwarder upgrade.

## Reputation systems {#reputation-systems}

Embedding a list of known trusted resolvers in a client is only one possible model for assessing the reputation of a resolver. In future a range of online reputation services might be available to be queried, each returning an answer according to their own specific criteria. These might involve answers on other properties such as jurisdiction, or certification by a particular body. It is out of scope for this document to define these query methods, other than to note that designers should be aware of bootstrapping problems. It is the client's decision as to how to combine these answers, possibly using additional metadata (e.g. location), to make a determination of reputation.

> ### Granularity of reputation system

Reviewer: I don't think we need this section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This document is written using the assumption that ADN is the finest grained key for which it is useful to have a reputation value. With DoH it is possible to have multiple independent services at different URI paths, and with DoT and DoQ it is possible to separate by port. {{NEXTDNS}} is an example of DoH URI separation, with one path per customer, dynamically provisioned. It is an open question whether it is useful to be able to query, and provide, multiple reputations per ADN. If that is answered with yes, references to ADN in this document will need to be updated appropriately. If answered no, ADN reputations must be defined based on the worst-case service offered at that name.

## Using resolvers of intermediate reputation

If the determined reputation is a binary "definitely trustworthy" or "definitely malicious", the client's recommended action is clear. However, intermediate trust levels are also possible (e.g. "probably safe", "newly launched"). In these cases there are some options clients can consider.

The client can simply decline to the use the encrypted service. In this case, unless there is another option, the client will fall back to Do53.

> The client can ask the user. For this prompt the ADN may be recognizable to the user as that of an ISP. It's also possible to convey information about why the ADN lacks some element of reputation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The client can ask the user about specific domain names that appear in the certificate. These names might be recognizable to the user, e.g. as that of an ISP. It's also possible to convey information about why the ADN lacks some element of reputation.
```

The client can also use the encrypted service for a limited time, as a means of mitigating. By limiting the DDR response TTL to 5 minutes, a client can ensure that any attacker can continue to monitor queries for at most 5 minutes after they have left the local network.

# Management of local blocking functionality

Certain local DNS forwarders block access to domains associated with malware and other threats. Others block based on the category of service provided by those domains, e.g. domains hosting services that are not appropriate for a work or school environment. In the short term to ensure this service is not lost due to a cross-forwarder upgrade, the maintainers can simply add "resolver.arpa" to their actively curated list of domains to block. This pattern has been deployed by Mozilla, with the domain "use-application-dns.net" {{MOZILLA-CANARY}}.

> In the long term, it is best for filtering providers to implement support for encrypted DNS. The following subsections describe some ways to implement this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the long term, it is best for filtering DNS forwarders to implement support for encrypted DNS. The following subsections describe some ways to implement this.
```

## Local implementation with DNR

> The local forwarder can be upgraded to one that implements an encrypted DNS service discoverable through DNR. This requires a TLS certificate on the local device, proving ownership of the chosen ADN. Onward queries to the internet should also be protected with encryption.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The local forwarder can be upgraded to one that implements an encrypted DNS service discoverable through DNR. This requires a TLS certificate on the local device, proving ownership of the chosen ADN. Onward queries to the internet should also be protected with encryption.
```
```suggestion
The local forwarder can be upgraded to one that implements an encrypted DNS service discoverable through DNR. This requires a TLS certificate on the local device, proving ownership of the chosen Authentication Domain Name (ADN). Onward queries to the internet SHOULD also be protected with encryption.
```

## Local implementation with DDR

> If the local forwarder can be assigned a public IP address, and it can be upgraded to offer an encrypted DNS service, this can then be made discoverable through classic DDR. This requires a TLS certificate on the local device, proving ownership of the public IP. Onward queries to the internet should also be protected with encryption.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the local forwarder can be upgraded to offer an encrypted DNS service, this can then be made discoverable through classic DDR. If the device has a private IP (as presumed for RVS), a self-signed certificate is sufficient. Onward queries to the internet SHOULD also be protected with encryption.
```

Future deployments of interposable domains can instruct administrators to enable or disable DDR when adding the forged record, but forged records in legacy DNS forwarders could be lost due to a cross-forwarder upgrade.

### Mitigation: Exemption list

There are a small number of pre-existing interposable domains, largely of interest only to web browsers.  Clients can maintain a list of relevant interposable domains and resolve them only via the network's resolver.

## Caching

Many legacy DNS forwarders also provide a shared cache for all network users. Cross-forwarder upgrades will bypass this cache, resulting in slower DNS resolution for some queries.

### Mitigation: Stub caches

Clients can compensate partially for any loss of shared caching by implementing local DNS caches.  This mitigation is already widely deployed in browsers and operating systems.

# Privacy Considerations

The conservative validation policy results in no encryption when a legacy DNS forwarder is present.  This leaves the user's query activity vulnerable to passive monitoring {{?RFC7258}}, either on the local network or between the user and the upstream resolver.

> Reputation validated selection enables the use of encrypted transport in these configurations, reducing exposure to a passive surveillance adversary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Reputation Validated Selection enables the use of encrypted transport in these configurations, reducing exposure to a passive surveillance adversary.
```

### Mitigation: Reputation update

Once an attack has been detected, it should be reported to relevant reputation services so that they can revise their assessment of the ADN.

## Forensic logging

### Network-layer logging

With the conservative validation policy, a random sample of IP packets is likely sufficient for manual retrospective detection of an active attack.

With reputation verified selection, forensic logs must capture a specific packet (the attacker’s DDR designation response) to enable retrospective detection.

#### Mitigation: Log all DDR responses

Network-layer forensic logs that are not integrated with the resolver can enable detection of these attacks by logging all DDR responses, or more generally all DNS responses.  This makes retrospective attack detection straightforward, as the attacker's DDR response will indicate an unexpected server.

### DNS-layer logging

DNS-layer forensic logging conducted by a legacy DNS forwarder would be lost in a cross-forwarder upgrade.

#### Solution: Plan to upgrade

> Forwarders that want to observe all queries from RVS clients should plan to implement DNR, or DDR with a public IP. In the short term it is possible for the forwarder to disable DDR by responding negatively to _dns.resolver.arpa but this is not recommended long-term as it lacks confidentiality and integrity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Forwarders that want to observe all queries from RVS clients should plan to implement DDR or DNR. In the short term it is possible for the forwarder to disable DDR by responding negatively to _dns.resolver.arpa but this is not recommended long-term as it prevents confidentiality protection.
```
